# map -- making xargs simpler *and* more powerful at the same time!

[[TOC]]

----

The `map` command was something I wrote a long time ago and have used pretty
much forever, in a sort of "taken for granted" way.  I would never have put it
out there if I had not, by chance, discovered something called [GNU
Parallel][gp] and started reading the **huge** list of examples on its pages.

And yet, casually looking at the examples, I found that `map` could do pretty
much all of the generic ones!  So much so that I sat down and started writing
down `map` equivalents of GNU Parallel's examples, and before I knew it I was
about half way through their list with only a few that `map` could not do!
The end result was this [feature comparison][mapgp].

But...

  * `map` is 330 lines of perl.  GNU Parallel is 5000 lines.
  * `map` has 3 options (if you don't count -h, -q, and -v).  GNU Parallel has
    almost a 100.

(In all fairness, [here][cantwont]'s a list of things `map` can't/won't do
which GNU Parallel can/will, although a lot of them are "kitchen sink" items!)

And that was when I decided to put this out there as its own little project.

If you use it, please let me know.  Some quick documentation is right here in
this file.  Examples are [here][mapgp].  `map` responds to `-h` as you would
expect, if you need to refresh your memory.

[gp]: http://www.gnu.org/software/parallel/

----

## concepts

'map' is like xargs in many ways, except for having very few options, and a
fixed set of "replace strings", all using the `%` character.

The **biggest difference**, conceptually, is that map will treat each input
line as one single argument and does not space-separate them again.  This
makes it usable by default for filenames with spaces etc (although please see
the IMPORTANT NOTES section later for details).

The second difference is that `map` will happily treat the first argument as
the command and the rest as input "lines" if STDIN is a tty, so you can say
things like:

    map gzip *.pdf

or

    map "zip -q -r % %" src doc conf contrib hooks

The third difference is that map also has a pretty cool "delimiter
mode" that at first seems totally unrelated to xargs but actually is not.
There are a couple of examples later.

## default replacement string

For quick reference, here are the defaults if no '%' sign exists anywhere in
the command.  See the next section(s) for what '%' and '%%' mean.

Normally a '%%' is assumed to be appended to the end.  If the `-p` option is
used without the `-n` option, then this changes to a single '%'.

## single replacements

`%` is replaced by the current input line, with a trailing slash removed if
present.  `%D` is replaced by the directory name of the current filename.
`%B` is the basename and `%E` is the extension.  (This means that `%` is
pretty much equal to `%D/%B.%E`).

These replacements use only one input line per run, so

    seq 1 3 | map echo %

gives you

    1
    2
    3

## multiple replacements

However, most often, you want all the arguments tacked on to one "run" of the
the command.  Do this by specifying a `%%`:

    seq 1 3 | map echo %%

returns

    1 2 3

Since this is the most common reason for using map, this is the default if you
don't specify either % or %%:

    seq 1 3 | map echo
    # returns:
    1 2 3

A `%%` (and similarly `%%D`, `%%B`, and `%%E`) get replaced by as many input
lines as possible (subject to internal limit of command line length and the
user-specified `-n` value if used).

Just like GNU Parallel, this replacement even works within a word, replicating
the entire word:

    seq 1 3 | map echo abc-%%-def

produces

    abc-1-def abc-2-def abc-3-def

## multiple jobs in parallel

When you run something like:

    map -p 4 gzip *.pdf
    # yes, it doesn't have to be of the form 'ls *.pdf | map -p 4 gzip'!

you are running 4 jobs in parallel.  This indicates that the job might be CPU
bound (usually, though not always) so it's best to run each job on one input
line rather than give it as many as it will take.

So when you run in parallel mode, the default is `%` because that is what
makes sense.

## specifying maximum arguments per invocation

However, if you use `-n`, (even if you are also using `-p`) the default
switches back to `%%`.  The logic is that specifying "maximum arguments per
invocation" implicitly gives permission to actually *have* more than one
argument, overriding the `-p` exception.

So yeah this is an exception to an exception but I don't think it's too hard
to remember.

And if in doubt you can always specify what you want you know...

## delimiter mode

Here's an example; more documentation may follow if anyone asks but notice the
delimiter character (colon) and the specification of field 1 and field 7:

    cat /etc/passwd | egrep -v 'nologin|bash' | map -d=: echo %1 use %7 as shell

The default delimiter is whitespace.  For convenience, '-d=t' uses tabs.
Anything else, like ':', is specified literally, like above.

Here's another example: report users who have some shell as login but no GECOS
field:

     < /etc/passwd map -d=: -- '[[ %7 =~ sh ]] && [ -z "%5" ] && echo %1 || :'

## IMPORTANT NOTES

**Filenames with unusual characters**

Map **will** work fine with such filenames **except that** you cannot use
parallel mode (since that invokes xargs).  You cannot also use redirection or
multiple commands unless you provide your own quoting.

For example (assuming some command sending in a list of filenames), this will
fail:

    ... | map 'echo -n `gzip <  %  | wc -c`; echo -n '*100/'; wc -c <  % ' | bc

but this will succeed:

    ... | map 'echo -n `gzip < "%" | wc -c`; echo -n '*100/'; wc -c < "%"' | bc

(by the way, this computes the size of the gzipped file as a percentage of the
original)

**OTHER WARNINGS**

  * you may need to use `--` to separate map's options from it's command if
    the command also has options.  Map's option parsing is rather greedy (it's
    on my todo list to fix this).

  * never mix the 3 styles of replacement strings ('%' and its cousins, '%%'
    and its cousins, and '%1', '%2', etc for delimiter mode).  Odd things will
    happen -- I don't check for sanity.

  * parallel mode defaults to number of CPUs.
